Why do you have a role at the bank, and
what is the purpose of your job?
>> Why am I employed? I
I actually
>> don't mean that from like why you're
employed like if you've gotten the
equity call etc. Why is this an
important role though to have at a bank?
>> Well, I I remember
in the run-up to the
Nasdaq bubble bursting, we were having
our round table lunches at at
Kleinworts.
And Tony Dye then, who was head of
Phillips & Drew Asset Management, who
had become bearish too early, value a
bit like Jeremy Grantham, value
oriented.
I remember him saying to the head of
equities
at Kleinworts, "Well, I totally agree
with what Albert's saying, but why
haven't you fired him?"
Because that's what happens to most
bears or most analysts who get it wrong.
Not on the bullish side, but if you call
if you're an economist and call a
recession on the sell side, you you and
you're wrong, you're usually out pretty
quickly. There's there's such a bias
towards optimism, and it's it's it's and
it's not just confected, it's it's
natural. It's like an analyst covering a
stock. You Inevitably, they're going to
be usually enthusiastic about their
sector.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, I think I
think a lot of people don't understand
[music]
the role of bears in finance and
markets.
It's to uh it's the it's to uh create
headlines for tweeting, right? And
retweets.
>> it's to sell newsletters, but
>> going to
>> [laughter]
>> I was going to say it's to get emails
opened, right?
>> That's right. So, I think, you know,
being a bear who's selling a newsletter,
we can all kind of see the business
model there. But, if you're an analyst
at a big sell-side firm, and you're
known as a bear, that seems incredibly
difficult to me because like the
tendency on Wall Street and investment
and finance is towards optimism, right?
You have to place bets on the future.
You have to put your money to work. And
if you're managing to be a sort of like
long-run bear at a big sell-side
institution, that's pretty impressive to
me. Also, you're selling. Yes. And it is
>> [laughter]
>> you're selling. They call it the
sell-side. And if you know, there's all
these financial instruments that the
financial institution has, and you're
the bear, it's like, "Well, I'm not
going to buy anything." You know what
else?
It's the sell-side. You're supposed to
have something to sell, not something
telling people to not selling other
people to sell. The clue is truly in the
name. But the other thing that's very
impressive is if you're a long-run bear
at a sell-side institution who also
manages to be the top-ranked macro
analyst in your category for 13 years in
a row, that's pretty impressive, right?
It is impressive. And this gets to
another important point, which is people
like to read. And people like And I
think about this even with podcasts and
other forms of any sort of media,
whether it's formal media in a PDF that
a bank sends sells or a news
organization, people like to consume
ideas. And it doesn't mean they're going
to consume the ideas and say, "Oh, this
was convincing. Buy, sell." But they
like to hear a range of ideas. They like
to see how it They like to have their
thought process influenced. They like to
stress test
>> Well, this is what I was going to say.
Like to me, the role of a true bear on
Wall Street is for big investors and
institutional clients to actually test
some of their thinking. You know, if you
have a bunch of analysts who are trying
to pitch you tech stocks at the moment,
like you want to hear an opposing
viewpoint that says, "Well, maybe like
here is the downside scenario." Well,
here's the other thing right now, we're
recording this in early May 2026,
which is that equity markets around the
world are very high.
Some would say bizarrely high, but
they're very high for various reasons we
could get into. Bonds have been selling
off very much and that's sort of the
story we're hearing in the UK right now
and the headlines are all about
generally how much gilt yields keep
spiking. But we're in this moment in
which I would say there's a real
mismatch but between I would say gloom,
which you could pick your poison. Why
are you gloomy? You're gloomy because
the AI's are going to take us or going
to destroy the world. You're gloomy
because the world around. You're gloomy
because high deficits etc. You're gloomy
because politics in so many countries
seems to be deteriorated. There's plenty
of reason for gloom out there and yet,
you know, you're losing if you're not in
the stock market
etc. It is just a very weird time but
yes, there is this weird mismatch
depending on how you look at it between
sentiment across any many different
attempts to measure sentiment and what
certain at least certain parts of the
market are doing. Yeah, I think that's
exactly right and also, you know, you
mentioned bond yields going up. So we're
recording this on May 6th. The 30-year
UK gilt we're in London still by the way
hit like it's highest since 1998 or
something yesterday and you're
absolutely right. There does seem to be
a tension between all these little
glimmers of inflation that are out there
>> Yeah. and what's going on in the equity
market because you would expect with
rates possibly going up that equities
were going to take a hit. But anyway, we
do in fact have the perfect guest.
>> Someone who is very well known not just
for being a bear but also for having
very long-term sort of a paradigm views
on the relationship between bonds and
equities as well.
>> Someone we've been reading for a very
long time probably since the beginning
of our careers.
>> We finally convinced him to come on the
podcast. I gave it away earlier when I
said the
the top ranked XL survey macro analyst
13 times in a row but we are of course
going to be speaking with Albert Edwards
who is the global strategist over at
SocGen. So, thank you so much for coming
on Alpha Beta. It's it's a pleasure. I
don't get out much and
>> [laughter]
>> this this is a real treat. They've let
you out of the bear cave. Exactly.
>> That's right.
That's right. Um first of all, I should
ask, when people introduce you as a
well-known bear, does it grate you the
way it seems to grate some other people?
I remember Nouriel Roubini would always
get upset if you called him Dr. Doom. Do
you get upset?
>> No, I'm pleased to be introduced at all
and anyone still speaking to me, quite
frankly. Okay. Is it a deserved
reputation?
Um
it's deserved in the sense that
the media has more latched on to or had
more latched on to my bearish views on
equity markets.
Uh but not my bullish views on
government bonds.
I joined the sell-side. So, I've been
working in in finance since 1982. I
joined the Bank of England just over the
road.
Uh here. But I joined after a little
stint on the buy-side.
Which is why, by the way, I I write such
short notes because I've actually had to
read these notes on [laughter] on the
buy-side over the years. And I know the
clients and and readers aren't sitting
there waiting for for them. And if they
can't read them in about 3-4 minutes,
they're not going to read they're not
going to read them at all. But I joined
the sell-side in in in in 1988 at at
Kleinwort became Dresdner Kleinwort. I
was there for almost 20 years. But I saw
the back end of the Japanese bubble and
I saw
the what Richard Koo and Nomura used to
describe the balance sheet recession in
Japan and how it unraveled.
And by the time we got to and how
Western economists were saying, "You're
doing it all wrong in Japan. You should
be just liquidating
the capital stock and get to get rid of
this deflation."
And I was thinking, "Well, firstly,
actually, this what's happening in Japan
is that just ahead of you, 10 years
ahead of you in the West, because their
bubble was a lot their credit bubble was
a lot earlier. And when it burst in the
West, you won't be doing what you're
recommending that they do. You'll be
you'll be you'll be slashing rates,
you'll be doing everything to stop
recessions. But the key thing about
Japan,
uh I develop so the back end of 1998,
when I thought this is coming to the
West, I developed what I call the ice
age view, which is
secular stagnation thesis, which is next
essentially Lawrence Summers, the excess
of savings over investment driving down
real yields and bond yields, and causing
a re-rating of of of of valuations.
Uh but we saw in Japan after a while
that actually your inflation and bond
yields and interest rates will carry on
coming down,
but after a while, it wouldn't cause any
more P expansion. Actually, quite the
reverse. The inflation got so low and so
close to deflation, it would cause P
contraction.
So, what I was trying to do is bolt on a
financial market view onto the secular
stagnation thesis. And that ran all the
way from 1996. I ran with it. I I
thought it was coming immediately after
the Asian crisis. You mentioned gilt
yields being their highest since 1998. I
can remember that, the aftermath of the
Asian crisis, the Russian GKO crisis.
This is where longevity helps, by the
way. You can I might not be able to
remember what happened yesterday, but I
can remember 20 years ago quite quite
well.
Uh and then from 2000 onwards, you
started to see
as bond yields got lower, problems were
merging within the equity markets.
Uh so so that was basically the ice age
ice age thesis. And it worked very So,
although I was an equity bear and well
known for that, I was very much a born
bull, government bond bull.
I'm glad you said, just reflecting, I'm
glad you said the point about having
come from
the buy side and understood attention
spans of readers and how that informed
your view of the sell side because
that's something that I've said or
thought many times. Having started my
career, a lot of what I learned to write
was from reading sell side research and
it it
I figured that, okay, the sell side
analysts are writing for people who are
just inundated with notes, right? Their
inboxes are filled with all kinds of
notes. They must know what the type of
content that the buy side is willing to
read. Chart heavy often, concise, etc.
And so early on in my journalism career,
I figured, okay, if this is how the sell
side writes, it's probably a good idea
to sort of crib some of these ideas
because they understand the realities of
shortened attention spans and so forth.
And now with social media, everyone has
the attention span essentially of a buy
side trader. What's your job? You know,
Tracy introduced you as strategist.
Setting aside your views specifically,
what did you what is your
What does success look like? Why do you
why do you have a role at the bank and
what is the purpose of your job?
>> Well, why am I employed? I I I actually
>> And I don't mean that from like why
you're employed like if you've gotten
the equity call, etc. Why is this an
important role though to have at the
bank?
>> I remember
in the run up to the
uh Nasdaq bubble bursting, we were
having our round table lunches at at
Claridge's and Tony Dye then, who was uh
head of uh
Phillips & Drew asset management, who
had become bearish too early value a bit
like Jeremy Grantham, value orientated
and and his co-conspirator out in
uh out in uh Chicago, uh, Brince uh,
what's his name? Brinson,
uh, both had come under the umbrella of
UBS. I remember him saying to uh, the
head of equities at Kleinworts,
uh, well, I totally agree with what
Albert's saying, but why haven't you
fired him?
>> [laughter]
>> Because that's what happens to most
bears or most analysts who get it wrong.
Not on the bullish side, but if you call
if you're an economist and call a
recession on the sell side, you you and
and you're wrong. You're usually out
pretty quickly. There's a there's such a
bias
towards optimism and it's it's it's and
it's not just confected. It's it's
natural. It's like an analyst covering a
stock. You inevitably they're going to
be usually enthusiastic about their
sector and and and and stock. It's so
there there is a natural bias.
And part of my role, I mean, I I've I've
developed it over the years in that even
when I'm getting it wrong, how to avoid
getting fired. Not to be power We had a
We had a We had an analyst at Kleinworts
in in in the late '90s. He was a He was
a tech analyst. He was very bearish on
Nokia and Ericsson. He was right. He was
pounding the table with analysts with
sorry, with their clients and he pissed
off the uh, clients so much, he almost
got fired. Mhm. And the secret is to
develop strategies. This is my view for
what it's worth.
They can calibrate what I what I'm
thinking. I'm not too much in their
face. I'm not annoying them too much.
I'm a bit like Caesar always used to
have a slave right behind him
whose job it was to say to Caesar, you
are mortal. You are mortal.
Uh, I thought you were going to say
you're a bit like Caesar. I was like,
whoa, wait a second. No, I'm the slave.
Right.
>> I'm the weight slave and the actual
slave. Often those slaves themselves
were terminated in pretty horrendous
fashion themselves. But [laughter]
but it it's it's just to sort of
You know, if if the clients even clients
who are balls would want to hear what
I'm saying. Yeah. Just to know what to
be watching out for in the back of my
head. They've got to be fully invested.
They've got to participate. But hey,
should we we've got to keep dancing as
the Chuck Prince thing. But should we be
dancing near the fire escapes or in the
center of the room? That sort of thing.
All of that makes a lot of sense and I
want to get into the risks that you're
seeing now. But before we do, just going
back to the ice age thesis. So on the
equity side, explain what went wrong
because this is you know, the thing that
you're criticized for and you're sort of
known for is you've had a bearish view
on equities for a very very long time.
It didn't work out. What happened?
What happened from 2000
onwards if you look at charts of bond
yields carrying on falling equity yields
did start to rise. So you did have that
exactly what you saw in Japan.
What derails the
de-rating of equities in my view is
certainly quantitative easing.
So the green and the
wasn't just used once
>> [snorts]
>> in 2008
when when you were in your heyday. Well,
you're in your heyday now of course, but
you were in another heyday and another
another heyday.
But how it persisted all the way through
over the next 10 years and that
basically inflated and that was the job
of QE to inflate all asset prices. Where
the ice age continued to work
was within the equity market because
sectors which were benefited from lower
bond yields such as defensives or growth
sectors did extraordinarily well and
re-rated to huge PE premiums versus
cyclicality or or value stocks. So,
even though the equity manager might
ignore what I'm saying at the macro
level, well, the market's not going
down. Actually, within the equity
market, it was still very, very
relevant. This
Japanification of the West theme. Right.
Let's talk about then Japanification
and within Japanification, Japan
specifically, because this is an
important There's a lot going on right
now that's very important. In the 2010s,
you know, the Japanese the JGB market
for a long time, it was characterized as
the widow maker, right? Because everyone
looked at the size of the Japanese debt
stock. And they say it's going up and up
and up. It's big Japanese debt to GDP is
getting higher and higher, and yet rates
were going down. This confused a lot of
people. You were correct on the call
that that was actually sort of
irrelevant. That actually
debt stock could go higher and higher,
rates could keep going down. Japanese
yields famously zero, probably negative
in many instances. Post-COVID, however,
that's changed.
>> Yep. And now Japan Now Japan as well as
every other developed market economy,
the rates are going up. So, this
relationship, whatever was going on, has
flipped. What flipped really post-COVID
in your view such that
rates are going up all around the world,
including in Japan, but also especially
in the UK, that ice age of disinflation
and lower rates has truly come to an
end. I mean, what flipped
in in my view was was prior to the the
COVID
recession.
And by the way, before the COVID
recession, I was writing in in in in
2020 early 2020
before the
pandemic came along, that actually the
the next recession would see a
transition away from the ice age. I was
moving and it did work for me for for
quite a long time. But actually I was
thinking we were going to move to a a
new
paradigm. And and and the falling bond
yield story was going to going to stop.
And the reason was
up until that point
quantitative easing had been injected
primarily in
virtually entirely into the veins of
Wall Street. It was a fight it created
like the idea that that the QE didn't
create inflation was
nonsense. It created loads of inflation.
But the sort of inflation people like in
the housing, in in in financial assets.
>> Asset prices.
>> And no one complains about that unless
you don't own the asset prices. What it
caused was a lot of intergenerational
tension with younger people not being
able to afford, which is we can come on
to populism later. But one of the
reasons populism has
come along in in in space. It caused
lots of inequality, which even the
central banks eventually realized.
But what I thought would occur was as
you were
the next recession when it came along,
you were so close to outright deflation
and and and and certainly we remember at
that time you were having negative bond
so much of the market was negative bond
yields. Europe had quite clearly fallen
into the Japanification trap. The US was
heading there.
I thought and predicted that we would
get a flip over into a modern monetary
theory type QE where they started
injecting money into the veins of Main
Street. And a bit into what we call
>> Fiscal. So so so basically classic tax
cuts, checks dropping on people's
doorsteps, paid for by monetary
creation. And I didn't foresee clearly
that the pandemic made the situation,
the inflationary situation on on
consumer prices, a lot worse because of
the restricted supply chains.
And I you know, having read I've got a
lot of sympathy with with a lot of
I don't tend to have any dogmatic views,
monetarist, Keynesian, or or whatever I
can I'm I'm quite Catholic. I bring all
the themes in. There's quite a lot about
MMT I
I agree with. But reading Stephanie
Kelton's book, one thing was absolutely
clear.
Was they were saying, yes, we can do
this. It doesn't create inflation. But
when you hit capacity constraints, you
have to stop doing it. And nothing could
have been more capacity constrained than
global economy
during the COVID. So in my view, it was
back crazy to do what they were doing.
And it was going to create
And the money you could see it from the
broad money growth.
So just to be clear, and I know you said
we're going to skip ahead to the, you
know, populism, which is very
intertwined, I would say or many people
would say with with with what's going on
with economic policy right now.
Is the failure
the basically the premise that
governments could ever stop the fiscal
expansion once the capacity constraints
is hit. So you have the money drops, you
have the helicopter drops, you have the
checks, you have the tax cuts, arguably
quite justified during the worst of the
COVID. Is the core analytical error the
notion that after you hit that capacity
constraints, that governments have the
internal capacity to say, okay, we've
hit that point now where we have to
raise taxes or to stop the the
>> Democratically elected
>> elected officials are capable of saying,
"You know what? We've hit these capacity
constraints and now we have to unwind
the checks."
I don't think that I don't think
congenitally they are able to do that.
>> That's what I'm saying. Is that where
the Is that where the analysis breaks
down?
>> that well, that's where the That's where
the problem comes.
>> breaks down, yeah. That's where the
future, if you like, is so scary because
Well, actually, in the US, for example,
the the budget deficit detached itself
from economic reality before COVID hit
in Trump's first term. And that's when
you first started seeing huge amount
Yeah, debt Yeah, budget deficits heading
to 6 6% of GDP in
in absence of a recession or or a
crisis.
And we're at 7% of GDP. I was looking at
the IMF numbers before I came in. You're
at 7% of GDP when unemployment is this
slow.
You're never There's no appetite to And
if politicians try and do it,
and I would say part of the problem with
the UK at the moment so that yields at
28-year highs,
it's not that they haven't tried to do
it. They have tried to do it.
But if you It's a very fine tight rope
placating the bond markets
and off your electorate so much that
you're on your way out. To Dubai. Uh
yeah Well, you know, you're on your way
out of government.
>> Oh, okay. Well, they're
I think you're saying that the
electorate you're on your way out to the
electorate and your high taxpayers are
out to Dubai.
>> some of them are on the way out to Dubai
and then and then and then looping back
somewhere else at the moment. But uh
you're you're you're out you're out of
government. And and and and and this is
the problem for one of the problems for
the for the UK government is the
electoral electorate won't tolerate
unless there's a crisis. And you know,
almost politicians need a Eurozone type
Greek, Spanish, Italian crisis
to be able to implement the measures
that everyone knows needs to take
place. But But electors currently have
no appetite for. I saw this amazing
chart. You probably saw it, too, cuz it
was in Adam Tooze's newsletter recently,
but it was from TS Lombard and it showed
fiscal support during the 2022 energy
crisis in Europe as a percentage of GDP.
And I hadn't realized just how
substantial it actually was, like energy
tax cuts. And so, of course, the
question now is with oil going back up
and people coming under pressure if
we're going to see that same type of
fiscal response.
I don't think you can. Well, first first
of all, it's even in Europe, the rise in
the gas price is nowhere near as bad as
it was in 2022. And they will do They
will do stuff, and they have done stuff
in places like Spain despite the
European Commission warning the the
countries that actually you haven't got
the buffers to be able to do this. They
are trying to They They have been
reducing VAT. But I I quite like the
quote in the US. It's somewhat
different. I was just over the same I
was just over in Boston Boston recently.
I could see the gas price well above $2.
Yeah, especially in Massachusetts, yeah.
>> Yeah.
But it really is But But But the natural
gas price isn't.
It hasn't really gone up in the US. And
you know,
winding back to that famous
statement in the early '70s of this is
our currency, but your problem to the
Europeans.
Yeah, this is our war, US war, but it's
your problem. Europeans and especially
Asia, particularly Asia, which gets so
much of its derivative chemical supplies
out of the Gulf. I saw your chart of the
urea versus the corn price showing us
absolutely stratospheric.
Uh but so much of of the so much
derivative chemical products come out of
the Gulf, especially to Asia. I saw that
80% of India's ammonia comes from the
Gulf. Now
Asia is in real real trouble. And this
is coming down the I mean one thing I
think that's really surprised me uh in
the early part of the war was when I
looked at five-year versus five-year
inflation swaps, they'd come down. They
hadn't started going up. But recently,
the two-year into year shot up. And the
five-year and five-year have started to
go up. The people have started to
realize this is dragging on and and and
why the taco your your former colleague
Rod Armstrong who invented the taco
uh description
why the taco trade isn't working here. I
saw a very nice uh quip, which is
because Iran's involved, it takes two to
taco. And it it Trump can announce these
U-turns, but they're they're not
effective unless Iran is also in
participating or dancing the same dance.
So uh when when when I hear our oil
analysts, our commodity analysts on on
our call, the equity guys are still
really bullish, the bond guys somewhere
in between. The commodity guys are
basically sobbing into their
microphones. [laughter]
Because they know they know the
inflation coming down the track here in
fertilizers and food and everything.
This is the funny thing talking about
all the commodity guys see doom. It's
like it's knocking on our door and
everyone is like, "Oh, Well, see what
happens." I want to talk more, since
we're here in the UK, I men- I I
mentioned the Dubai thing, and I'm
actually very fascinated by this. Not
Dubai, people moving to Dubai
specifically per se,
but the political economy generally of
fiscal consolidation, which includes the
possibility of leaving. And when the
issue that I think people would decide
across UK and across Europe is probably
twofold. One is declining productive
capacity, manufacturing getting eaten by
Chinese competition, and digital
industry that can't keep up with what's
happening in the United States,
particularly with AI.
Do like Okay, you say it's obvious and
many people say it's obvious. We all
know that the government needs to
shrink the deficit, but this very tough.
If people can leave,
wealth taxes are very difficult, almost
infamously so, and particularly in an
era where the big money is being made
through equity markets, not through
traditional wage or labor income, et
cetera. It's great to say obviously
fiscal consolidation is the move, but it
is setting even setting aside electoral
constraints, is there an obvious path
towards reducing the deficit given the
means through which the people with
money can avoid paying tax? It is very
difficult. I mean, you mentioned the UK.
The UK is a very
specific problem in that so
many young people after the pandemic
have been signed off as permanently
sick. They don't even have to look for
work. So, the welfare bill has
to a large extent gone out of control in
in in the UK. And even though the labor
governments here has an overwhelming
majority, it couldn't get it through
parliament. Couldn't get any reform
measures through Parliament. And the
market's seeing that and the number of
U-turns they've had to do as as as their
own
MPs have rebelled, let alone the public
rebelling. Uh
mean it's very very difficult.
Uh and defense especially the
>> young people, right? Because there's the
heating assistance that the old people
and the triple lock so that the pension
goes up by the maximum or the whatever
the maximum of three different inflation
measures are. It's the It's the old It's
the old as well, right?
>> Yeah, no,
absolutely. And this is one of the
things which exacerbates
intergenerational
hostility tensions. Is that the younger
people who can't get on the housing
ladder
uh see the older people protected
through things like the triple lock,
pensions going up uh the of the of the
of the highest of of of wage inflation,
price inflation, or the minimum of 2 and
1/2%. So, on a real escalator and
clearly totally unaffordable. However,
when I look at the CBO and the US is
just when I look at the CBO projections
of US debt to GDP,
they go off to infinity. Very And you
And you know this is unsustainable cuz
infinity is is is not a number which is
sustainable.
Uh the only the IMF has looked at this
quite closely. The only other country to
go off to infinity even quicker than the
US is strangely China. Yeah. Uh in in in
its fiscal and and the IMF have cited
the US and China as the two basket
cases. Now, the UK
isn't the worst uh miscreant in terms of
its fiscal situation. France, I look at
the IMF numbers, France is much worse.
But, it's under the protection of the
Eurozone umbrella. The US is much worse,
but it's under the protection of the
dollar.
Uh being the reserve currency.
The bond vigilantes have woken up.
They're pretty off looking around at
what's going on.
They've got a dusty copy of Reinhart and
Rogoff
under their desk. They're thinking we're
getting you know, we're going over 100%
of GDP. We're getting near the levels of
where it's a problem. And and to be fair
on the public sector, what they've done
is transfer a lot of the excess debt
which was there in the household sector
and corporate sector
onto their own balance balance balance
sheets. But you you look at you look at
these and you think, well well actually
you look the vigilantes are looking to
pick someone off and give them a bloody
good kicking basically to teach everyone
else. Mhm. And and the gilt market is is
is is is the weakest, yeah, hasn't got
enough protection. It's it's the weakest
kid in the playground.
And it's going to get it's going to get
beat badly beaten up
uh at at some points. I mean I I think
Bill Gross Bill Gross many years ago
said the gilt market was sitting on a
better better kryptonite. Not
kryptonite, jelly. Nitroglycerin.
>> Nitroglycerin. Nitroglycerin.
>> and I think we're all we're almost And
and when you saw the the bond the oil
price come down yesterday
but the gilt price the gilt yield going
up that is a real that's a real issue
especially as Starmer Prime Minister
Starmer exits the scene at some stage
soon. That's right. We're recording this
also during local elections just to make
sure the maximum amount of stuff
possible could happen between when we
record this and when it actually
publishes. Um but actually okay, you say
the bond vigilantes have woken up and
one could infer from that statement that
like we are now in a longer term period
where bond yields are going to be higher
and inflation is possibly going to be
higher.
But, on the other hand, it feels like
the news cycle is so compressed
nowadays, and new stuff is happening all
the time, and there's so much chaos in
global politics. It also feels really
difficult to have a sort of
para- paradigmic, is that a word?
Paradigmatic?
>> Paradigmatic.
You're making up words.
>> Paradigmatic view of the market. Yeah.
You know, it's hard to have a
longer-term view on the market in the
way that one could have an ice age
thesis in the early 2000s. Is that
possible for you now, or are you sort of
all moving in the short term like
everyone else seems to be? I think it is
possible.
Uh at least I'm trying to make it
possible. But, as you say, markets are
so volatile. I I was reading that
the recent rally in the equity market,
10% plus rally, this was the fastest
ever rebound, 10% rebound after a 10%
correction.
And it's and and and it's
particularly on the equity market,
they're become so
uh
fixated with the buy on dips
uh mantra, that actually the Fed have
got our backs, there will never be a
recession again. If there was a
recession, it's because of the pandemic.
We can't actually remember 2008,
uh which is a consequence of a very long
period of of of growth building up
excesses.
Uh no, I I I I I
I think there is there is a place for a
long-term theme. And the long-term theme
is
actually, it's it's it's it's fiscal in-
it's fiscal incontinence, political
weakness, and eventually
the monetary authorities having to
monetize away these debts. Because in
the US, when you're paying 4% of GDP on
as government on your interest payments,
that is absolutely crazy. I mean, 10
years ago, I was looking at the charts,
10 years ago, it was roughly the same as
the Eurozone at around 2%. It's
absolutely crazy numbers. So, the end
game for me, I can remember 28%
inflation in the UK in the in in in in
the in the 70s in the 70s. I certainly
think we go back everywhere to
double-digit inflation.
>> Wow. Uh because Really? I know.
>> There's our headline to the episode.
>> Yeah. No, I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I
There
the fiscal dominance which is there. Uh
the central bank is will have no other
no other option. I mean, you could get
some consolidation on the crisis, but I
think that's where we're we're we're
heading.
Just just just monetize away this this
they'll couch it differently to I'm sure
they won't say, "And now we are
monetizing the debt."
>> Yeah. Do you ever uh
this happens Do you ever talk to either
new colleagues or clients for whom
talking about 2008 you might as well be
talking about the 1930s Great Depression
because this is like uh I feel like this
is happening more and more in my life.
Something that I take for gran Oh, well,
remember when Lehman and I might as well
be talking about Credit Anstalt
Yeah.
No, exactly. And with the retail
participation in in in in in the market,
you get these one-day options which I
don't don't understand.
It's it's so short-term, but having
I mean, one of the advantages of of
being in finance since you know,
is I can remember the Asian crisis which
is one of the first times I got myself
into deep trouble being banned from
Malaysia Malaysia after writing that
>> Are you still banned? I don't I don't I
don't I don't I don't I don't I feel for
you, if so.
>> But what you know, not relates to the
theme which we could live is going you
know in 1996
writing that the Asian
miracle was basically a pack of cards
waiting to collapse and I had on my
bookshelf this book from the World Bank
Thailand's economic miracle sustainable
growth and development and you just
think
I've seen this so many times before
going into the I mean I remember going
in the late 90s going around the US
saying look this is a huge bubble which
is going to collapse it's very similar
to the Asian crisis and basically my
the chief economist having to restrain
the clients from punching my lights out.
But I
you know when when I read what I do now
about the AI etc. I just think Yeah I've
I've heard this so many times and maybe
that's maybe being young is better
because you don't have that baggage.
Well being young I think you're more of
an optimist for sure.
>> You've got a lot less gray hair in your
beard than I have. Yeah but more than I
had a year ago so
I'm catching up quickly.
>> podcasts pick up color?
>> [laughter]
>> The cameras here are pretty good.
>> Make it black and white make it black
and white. I can confirm that when we
started this podcast you did not have
any gray hair and it all sort of set in
over the course of 10 years.
>> I notice more every day this is a fact.
Um since you mentioned AI and since
we're talking about historic parallels
there seem to be a lot of similarities
with the dot com bubble which is wild
enthusiasm for a new technology and this
expectation that everyone's going to be
making money.
On the other hand the argument against a
dot com redux is this idea that well you
know tech companies have very very heavy
valuations at the moment but they are
actually earning money and if you look
at the multiples they are nowhere near
where some of the dot-com companies
actually were. What's your thinking
there? How much of a parallel or analogy
is this? I mean, the main parallel I
would draw is with the telecom part of
the TMT. So the So the the dot-com
bubble was more TMT.
Telecom, uh, media, and technology.
People forget it was a bit It was a bit
wider.
But the telecom side was was quite
similar to what you're seeing now with
AI cuz they actually went out
and dug trenches and laid cable. There
was a capex boom. And if you were
selling cables in the same way you were
selling semiconductor Nvidia selling
semiconductor chips,
you benefited from producing picks and
shovels for the gold rush,
essentially.
And there was real There was real
profits there in the on the telecom
side, at least. But the problem is is is
is is the euphoria.
Is is is the narrative is so compelling
that you're given These companies are
given free money, essentially. Although
Oracle is not quite so free anymore. But
you're You're being given free money.
And you go off and spend it on You You
blow it on capex, which isn't
necessarily
going to be profitable
10 years down the road.
And what you've got is is basically when
you look at the, uh,
I USIT megacaps,
they've gone from being hugely,
uh,
free cash flow generative to zero. I saw
a chart 2027, zero. It's gone. It's
being blown. So Now Now
you might say, well, that that that that
At least they're not borrowing very
heavily. But they're starting to.
>> actually it's transforming. They're
They're They're balance sheet. So, I'll
just read you quite I've brought a quote
along here. I wrote it down so I I
didn't forget it.
But, it it's it's it's
it's about could be about the AI
transformation. So, not so long ago
a leading expert opined that and I put
this in my this sort of thing I write in
my notes. He opined that
in retrospect, we will look back and
recognize that the US economy was
experiencing a once-in-a-century
acceleration
of innovation which propelled forward
productivity, output, corporate profits,
and stock prices at a
at a pace not seen in generations if
ever.
Now, that
absolutely applies to to what is going
on now. That's a quote from Alan
Greenspan, 13th of January 2000.
At the New York the the Economic Club of
New York just before Nasdaq collapsed.
Now, all that was true and by the way, I
was reminded of that quote reading
Jeremy Grantham's book Making of a
PermaBear. Another PermaBear. I went to
his book launch and I
I don't read many books. I'm quite lazy.
I don't read many books. But, I thought
as I was going to his book launch, I
better read it. And I
he had some of these great quotes from
Bernanke and and and Greenspan which
they would probably like to erase from
people's memory. But, that equally
applies to now. It
it is absolutely transformational and it
probably will be transformational.
Doesn't mean you can't have a stock
market collapse. Yeah.
When bears have a book party, is it a
picnic?
>> [laughter]
>> Oh, that's a good one.
>> Thank you. Sorry, I was trying to think
of a bear joke. That was the best I
could come up with.
>> I like that. There's so many different
directions we could go in. I want to ask
you though something about the 2010s
um
that I've thought a lot about. You're
talking about QE. QE ended in the
mid-2010s. Now, I mean, first they
stopped cutting rates, then they start
you know, it was a series it was a
sequence, right? But then they actually
started shrinking the balance sheet. It
didn't affect stocks. Stocks just kept
going up. And now we look today and
again, stocks
at least in the US but around the world,
stocks are doing all very well. This is
despite the fact that rates are the rate
picture is nothing like it was
in the beginnings of what you
characterized as the ice age. Did that
make you question anything? Have you
revised any past views in light of the
fact that it turns out, evidently, that
ultra-low rates and quantitative easing
may not have been such a precondition
for these incredible equity market
gains?
How do you reconcile that? I think well,
certainly back in the
prior to prior to the COVID recession,
the quantitative easing for quite a
lengthy period, if you like,
got things going. Mhm. Got that momentum
going. And and one of the most
profitable ways methods of investing is
just momentum trading.
>> Sure.
I I sit near
our head of quant, Andy Lapthorne, who
I've worked with for 30 years. Last
month, he's actually trying to move a
few desks away from me.
Now Now, but I know looking at his quant
work, momentum investing is
absolutely fine. And actually, if I was
participating in in in in if if I was a
fund manager fully invested,
I'd be quite happily with that
investment style. But looking at the
technicals for when to get me out, is
the macro story changing? Is something
changing? I've been writing recently
that yes, profits are booming Yeah.
>> in the tech sector, but actually the
second derivative is starting to turn
over cuz you can't go parabolic forever.
Uh it's the second derivative is
starting to turn over. So, it's still
very healthy profit growth.
>> The momentum of the momentum
>> is starting to slow.
And
>> [laughter]
>> and and when you've got
bubble conditions,
then is is this something the bull
should be looking at? Even if you're a
bull, think well, actually that that is
a change I should be watching.
What what I would say at at the moment
is I think
I mentioned earlier
I think the retail in particular, which
certainly
after the liberation trade bear market
in early before the professional
investors, they've been consistently the
ones to drive the market back up. And it
is a bit like what causes big bear
markets are recessions. It's when And
usually when you're at the peak of the
cycle, you're on the wrong valuation,
wrong forward PE,
and prices collapse. So, if you if
you're a copper stock normally at the
peak of earnings, you're on a PE of
you're PE on four
and and so you're geared up for the the
collapse in in prices. They they they
have some memory there. But what tends
to happen in in bubbles, you end up on a
23 like the S&P on a 23 times forward PE
at the point of recession. So, you're
the wrong earning forward earnings and
the wrong PE.
And people have there's no
there's no acknowledgement that there
could be a recession out there. Apart
from the AI spending on investment,
which could collapse at any We've seen
it before. If And that way, deep sea
comes along. Something happens to blow
that narrative up.
But outside of that,
you look at the US economy, and you look
at the
Yeah, last year it seen no employment
growth. When the economy is totally
along quite happily between 2 and 3% and
not just because of the public sector,
private payrolls year-on-year slowed to
zero. You're thinking, "Yeah, yeah, it's
having an effect here. It has a positive
effects in some ways on on on unit labor
costs." But this is really undermining
consumption. So, real US real household
incomes are up half a percent
year-on-year, half a percent. Yeah,
consumes consumer spending in real terms
is still up over 2%. Why is that? The
savings re- ratio in the US in the last
year has collapsed from over 5% this
time last year to 3 and 1/2% now.
That is as low as it The only other
times it's been lower is after when the
as people were spending the COVID
checks, so it got down to 2 and 1/2%, or
just before the 2008 global financial
crisis when you had that credit bubble.
The consumer is totally tapped out. And
if you get a wave of inflation coming
through the economy through cost push,
last time companies just wiped up their
margins. So, they they put up their
prices, wiped up their margins as well
in an unprecedented fashion cuz margins
sort of contracted as costs went up.
They didn't. It was absolutely
unprecedented greedflation. And the St.
Louis Fed named the sectors which did
it, retail, wholesale, and construction
were the three big contributors to that
at a whole economy level. But But people
had pandemic checks then. So, companies
could get away with doing it then.
This time around, as this wave of
cost-push pressure comes through, are
companies going to be able to get away
with it when when the savings ratio is
already so low? Is it going to start
squeezing the corporate sector margins,
which are ludicrously, obscenely
inflated in my in my view?
And when these margins start cut If
these margins start coming down cuz they
can't pass on these price increases,
will they then react to that by cutting
jobs and cutting investment? So, could
the one surprise we get is actually the
economy outside of AI investment is far
weaker than we think, and actually could
tip over
into recession. Now, that could be a
real surprise cuz that could take down
the AI sector as well. It's not just an
exogenous
force. So,
I think that's an interesting
that that that that's that's an
interesting black swan cuz no one is
thinking this oil price could cause a
recession. One question I wanted to ask,
given your long career, um
when were you most worried about the
future? Is there a particular moment,
looking back, where you were, you know,
really hitting the panic button?
I tend to stay very close to the panic
button, a bit too close, some some
people say.
That's your job. I I I
tend to see problems around the corner.
Actually, instead I was I was on a
conference call with clients yesterday,
and I said, "Well, probably the most
bearish
thing I can think of from my side
is I don't feel as bearish as I have
done in the past. I I struggle to see an
immediate catalyst for collapse.
And and the positive narratives are
always very compelling. I I remember
that the time I was most worried
globally was going was was 2006-2007,
where it was obvious to me. I even
managed to I I and I don't understand
much about crypto and all all these
complicated things or the details of our
but I actually got to the bottom of
CDOs. And this was before the big short
film. Where they made it a bit simpler.
I actually understood CDOs.
I went to a CDO conference
in in in in 2000 2007.
And I was amazed that they weren't
optimistic. They were they were getting
really worried. And I I just thought
as a macro person, when someone like
Bernanke says when asked about uh the
housing bubble, I guess I I don't accept
your premise there is a bubble and
there's never been a nationwide house
price recession in in history. I just
think you're an idiot. You should not be
in your job, basically. And yes, he was
he was the right person at the time when
the bubble burst.
But if you looked at his cuz people
said, well, he did the thesis on the
Great Depression. You looked at his
thesis about the Great Depression. There
was nothing about the credit bubble that
preceded it at all. And similarly, he
just did not understand the
and and and and where the I'm not a big
fan of central bankers or the Bank of
England improved dramatically after I
left it.
The quality of the quality of the people
there.
Because
they're just so reluctant to admit
they're just constantly
screwing it up and making it worse. For
for for benevolent reasons. They're
trying to make it better.
But they make it a a lot a lot worse.
And quantitative easing, I in my view,
made it They might have been an argument
for doing the first quantitative
quantitative easing, but just keep on
going.
Uh Paul Volcker
eviscerated, just before he died,
eviscerated the Fed by saying, you know,
you can't measure inflation that that
closely. Yeah, you've got a 2% target
for inflation. Anywhere between 1 to 3
is okay, essentially, as long as it's
not accelerating off. And this is, you
know, we're we're between what broadly
between 1 and 3 now. But he said we were
getting down to one. With measurement
errors, it was ludicrous to try and push
it back up to 2%. You didn't need to do
that. And personally, I just think
central bankers need to be reined in
quite closely. I do think in retrospect
when we look back to the sort of late
2010s era of inflation, it it felt
pretty good even though we were below
target, but
Yeah.
Undershooting and inflation is never and
I I'm on record as saying this not just
in retrospect is I've never understood
people whining about too little
inflation. So. All right.
Well, um Albert, that was fantastic fun.
Thank you so much for finally coming on
Odd Lots.
>> It's been a real pleasure and I hope I
haven't scared your viewers. Bears are
fun. You're you're a pleasant guy.
>> Well, people who read my stuff think I'm
really miserable, but I'm actually a
very happy contented person. I I know I
know we're not I and I wear nice shirts
to try and cheer people try and cheer
people up. Weirdly.
>> But I hope I haven't depressed too many
of your viewers. Yeah, no, no, no, no, I
think I feel I feel I feel great. I feel
I feel great. I feel I feel great. I
feel I feel great. I feel I feel great.
I feel I feel great. I feel I feel
great. Joe, that was really good fun.
I'm glad we could finally have him on.
>> We've been reading Albert really
literally for over for decades or at
least over a decade now. Really fun to
finally finally meet him in the flesh.
>> are fantastic. Um one thing that stood
out to me, you know, I was thinking
about what he was saying about the US
savings rate and the ability of
companies to push through price
increases. And earlier this week I was
reading the um earnings transcript for
Colgate. And they were talking about
packaging costs going up quite
significantly because of higher
petrochemicals prices and also guiding
their margin lower for the full year. So
basically saying that they're going to
absorb the costs and there is one
analyst on the transcript who was like,
well, why don't you raise prices?
>> Uh-huh. And they basically didn't, you
know, classic executive style, they
didn't really say anything. They were
just like, if I were you, I would
incorporate the lower margin guidance
into your algorithm and leave [laughter]
it leave it at that. Um, but you know,
like there might be something there.
Totally. Can I just say this is going to
be the type of thing that someone says
at the very top and so forth, but before
we flew to London, I downloaded Ray
Kurzweil's
The Singularity Is Near book about This
Is published in 2004,
in which he predicts that in the first
half of this century we would have
machines that are more intelligent than
humans on almost every scale. But one of
the things he says in the book is that,
you know, part of his theory is that,
you know, computers are going to keep
getting better and better and as they
get better, more money will flow into
computer investments because they can do
more things and there Moore's law and
all that and that actually the rate of
acceleration, the the derivative of the
derivative can actually keep going up
and up and up until you do get that
vertical. And so, you know, now I'm
thinking like we all know and that like
the stock market would not be nearly
where it was where it is right now if it
weren't for AI, obviously.
>> Right. I might be in a bear market. I
might be in a recession.
>> Yeah, the economy wouldn't be either.
nothing like it is now. But now I'm like
in that mood reading this to like and
and Albert said, he's like, I feel a
little weird right now because I don't
know what the obvious bearish catalyst
is. Right now I'm in a little bit of a
weird situation. And me I'm reading this
book and I was like, what if like
earnings literally just go to infinity?
Maybe it could happen. I don't know. But
I don't know. If Albert Edwards feels
pretty good about stocks right now and
that's And I'm talking about how
earnings could go to affinity. This is a
side that maybe these are the types of
episodes we record on the top. Okay, um
shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there. Okay, this has
been another episode of the Odd Lots
podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe
Weisenthal. You can follow me at The
Stalwart. Follow our producers Carmen
Rodriguez at Carmen Arm and Dash Bennett
at Dash Bot, Caleb Brooks at Caleb
Brooks, and Kevin Lozano at Kevin Lloyd
Lozano.
And for more Odd Lots content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
You can find that at bloomberg.com/odd
lots. And you can chat about all of
these topics 24/7 in our Discord
And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like or leave a comment or a
better yet, subscribe. Thanks for
watching.
>> [music]